Overview
The goal of this hackathon is to predict gene expression differences based on various features of genome sequences. Gene expression (transcript or mRNA abundance) is transcription of DNA into RNA and is determined by DNA sequence features around each gene, primarily but not exclusively transcription factor binding sites in promoter regions upstream of genes. Changes in DNA sequences can thus result in differences in gene expression. Individuals (e.g. humans or yeast strains) often show differences in gene expression. A major challenge to understanding phenotypic variation within a species, including human disease, is identifying DNA sequence changes that affect gene expression. 

Data
The data for this hackathon come from a recently published paper (https://elifesciences.org/articles/68469), which describes in more detail the background, significance and how the data were collected. Briefly, the data are from gene expression differences and various genome sequence annotations in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Gene expression differences were measured by RNA sequencing of a hybrid of two yeast strains. For each gene, the two alleles (one from each strain) were distinguished using the RNA sequences and their differences in gene expression dynamics was quantified, with zero equal to no expression divergence. (Note divergence does not exceed 10 and divergence measures how different the two alleles are in their temporal changes). The genome annotations (features) associated with each gene were obtained from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) and from genome sequencing of the two yeast strains. SGD features include gene positions and flanking annotations (e.g. transposable elements). Genome sequencing features include the number single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) present upstream, downstream and within each gene, as well as transcription factor binding site annotations for each promoter allele. Because the transcription factor binding site (TFBS) annotations differ from those described in the paper, they are described in more detail here.

TFBS data: The promoter regions of each gene were scanned for transcription factor binding sites using 1887 binding site (motif) models. The TFBS data include the binding site score, position and strand for each gene's promoter region. The score is the log(base 2) ratio of the probability of a sequence under a motif model over a background model (score >> 0 indicates a good match to a binding site). The position is the distance to the start codon of the gene in base pairs. The strand is whether the match is on the forward (1) or reverse (0) DNA strand.

Strains: The hybrid strain was generated by crossing a wine strain (BC217, also called UCD2120) to an oak tree strain (YJF153). Thus, features associated with wine strain alleles use BC217 labels and those with the oak alleles use YJF153.

Data files
Features: features_train.tsv and features_test.tsv
This tab delimited file contains a data matrix of genes (rows) and gene features (columns). The first column is a unique gene identifier, the second column (DIFF) is the measure of expression divergence (0 indicating no divergence, higher values equal greater divergence), and the remaining columns contain features associated with each gene that can be used to predict gene expression differences.

Feature descriptions: feature_descriptions.tsv
This tab delimited file contains two columns of data. The first column contains the column names in the features.tsv file and the second contains a description of the associated data.

TFBS features: tfbs_score_BC217_train.tsv, tfbs_score_YJF153_train.tsv, tfbs_score_BC217_test.tsv and tfbs_score_YJF153_test.tsv
These tab delimited files contain a data matrix of genes (rows) and TFBS features (columns) for wine strain alleles (BC217) and oak strain alleles (YJF153). The first column (gene) is the gene unique identifier, the second column is the location (LOC) of the gene (chromosome:start-stop), the remaining columns are the binding site scores, positions and strands. The remaining column labels have names that indicate the transcription factor name, the motif model number, the data type (score/position/strand), and the strain name (BC217/YJF153) separated by underscore.

In all files, NA = not applicable or not available.

Hackathon objective and evaluation
The objective of the hackathon is to correctly predict the amount of divergence in gene expression dynamics based on associated genome sequence annotations (features) provided in the data files. In the data files, 80% of the genes are for training with expression divergence values given, and 20% are unlabeled and in the test set. Group performance will be measured by the sum of squared deviations between the true and predicted divergence values.

Submission
Predictions should be submitted as plain text files with each gene (SGD identifier) on a separate line followed by a number indicating expression divergence. Genes and divergence values should be separated by a comma (csv format).





